---
title: Personal Finance
ispage: yes
unlisted: yes
...

Personal financal is the act of managing one's own monetary resources. This
includes, but is not limited to, savings, investments, insurances, loans, bills,
and taxes. Financial literacy is a mostly overlooked part of general
[education](/wiki/education), however various countries are starting to
understand the importance of financial knowledge (see for example the Financial
Literacy Month).

## Accounting

In my opinion, to get a hold on personal finances, one needs to understand some
accounting basics.

In accounting, we want to measure and track information about entities. In the
most general sense, that entity would be money, but it could be anything else as
well. To do so, we group those entities into three categories: *Assets*,
*Liabilities* and *Equity*. Those form the basis of the so called "Accounting
equation":

$$ Equity = Assets - Liabilities $$

When applied to personal finance (for a single person at least), equity can be
equated to net worth. Assets are things we own (primarily money, but also
objects such as a car or a house) and liabilties is our debt (such as student
loans or credit cards).

On top of that, we'll use *Expenses* and *Revenue* to describe changes to the
aformentioned categories.

## Bookkeeping

To analyse the flow of our money over time, we need to do Bookkeeping. There are
various methods of bookkeeping, but one system which has prooven itself over
time is the so-called *Double-Entry* bookkeeping system.

In it, each change to an account needs to be accompanied by an inverse change of
a second account.

A simple example is a money transfer from our chequing account to our savings
account: If we register a debit on the chequing account, we also have to
register a credit to the savings account.

Things get more involved if the second account is outside of our control. For
example, if we get paid by our employer, we will still record a change to two
accounts: One being our chequing account, the other being a "virtual" account of
the employer.

What makes the double-entry bookkeeping system so powerful is that it's trivial
to detect errors: The total sum of all accounts is always zero.

Each change (expense or revenue) is recorded in a journal. That journal is often
called *Ledger*. One could have a physical ledger, but various digital ones
exist which might be easier to manage.[^hledger]

## Savings

The primary reason why bookkeeping is important is to maximize savings. But why
is having savings so important?

1. Emergencies. We don't want to find ourselves in a situation where we are
   forced to pay but can't do so. A rule of thumb is to have two months of
   income liquid.

2. Large purchases. There will always be some purchases for which we need to
   save first. Prime examples are cars and real estate. If we save more, we can
   realise those large purchases more quickly. Note that not all purchases will
   reduce your net worth. For example, a house will usually hold its value (if
   not increase). Therefor we can think of of purchasing a house as a different
   form of savings.

3. Passive income. If invested right, savings can produce a fair amount of
   passive income.

4. Retirement. This is the largest reason. There will be a time where we cannot
   generate income anymore and need to live from pensions. Usually a pension
   consists of three parts: Some social benefits paid by the state,
   employment-based pensions (i.e. money we pay into a pension plan while being
   employed) and personal savings. The latter we can influence the most.

## Retirement

As previously noted, the biggest reason for savings is our retirement. There are
two numbers to keep in mind: Our life expectancy and the date of our retirement.
There are various resources online to get an idea of your life expactancy and
how to improve it. But for the sake of the argument, let's assume one dies at 85
and retires at 65. This leaves 20 years during which we need to support
ourselves.

Retirement plans can get very complex, but the basic idea is to calculate your
annual expenses and cover those with your savings. A naive example would be
annual expenses of 20,000\$, which would mean that we need to have 400,000\$ in
savings at the age of 65 (adjusted for inflation: 586,403.51\$).

## Passive income and financial independence

The previous calculations, besides being somewhat naive, have one other flaw: We
cannot accurately predict our life expectancy. If we spend our savings as if
we'll die with 85, we'd be broke the day we turn 86. Therefore, lots of people
just save as much as they can (or are comfortable with) and try to limit their
spending in their retirement.

However, there is a better way: Passive income. Because with enough passive
income, we achieve financial independence - i.e. our passive income surpases all
of our expenses.

There are many ways to generate passive income, but the most common one is
through dividends of investments. For example, if we have stock which pays 4% in
dividends, we would need to invest 25 times our expenses.

Again, if we reduce our expenses, we also reduce to amount of money we need to
invest. But thinking back to our naive retirement example from earlier: We said
that we'd need 20 years of expenses if we plan to retire 20 years. It turns out
that pushing that a little further to 25 "years" of expenses paid, we could be
financially independent.

This option is the most attractive when we plan to retire more than 25 years.
Therefore most people who try to be financially independent also plan to retire
early, thus coining the term "FIRE".

<!--## Net worth targets

| Age | Multiple of gross Income |
|:----|--------------------------|
| 25  | 0.5                      |
| 30  | 2                        |
| 35  | 5                        |
| 40  | 11                       |

-->

[^hledger]: I can recommend
  [plaintextaccounting.org](https://plaintextaccounting.org/)
